Add ReadMe for the Json to Record Converter Util (#37175)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang: misc/json-to-record-converter/README.md

# JSON to Record Converter

> The tool is intended to map JSON values directly to Ballerina records without converting the JSON value to its schema. The tool individually analyzes the JSON value nodes and maps it to the Ballerina record either in-line or other. The JSON value is parsed as a parse tree using Google’s gson package. And the tree is traversed to generate the Ballerina record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool is intended to map JSON values directly to Ballerina records without converting the JSON value to its schema. The tool analyzes the JSON value nodes individually and maps them to the Ballerina record either in-line or other. The JSON value is parsed as a parse tree using Google’s `gson` package and the tree is traversed to generate the Ballerina record.
```
Better to specify what is meant by `line or other`.

## Features

> In the current implementation we support JSON value to Ballerina Record Conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current implementation supports converting JSON values to Ballerina records.
```

> ##### _Example JSON Value_

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Example
**The JSON value**
```
Why is this heading level 5? We can add a heading as `Example` and then have sub-topics for the `JSON value` and the `Converted Ballerina record`.

```json
{
  "id": "0001",
  "type": "donut",
  "name": "Cake",
  "images": [
    {
      "url": "images/0001.jpg",
      "width": 200,
      "height": 200,
      "isTransparent": true
    },
    {
      "url": "images/0001.jpg",
      "width": 200,
      "height": 200
    }
  ],
  "thumbnail": {
    "url": "images/thumbnails/0001.jpg",
    "width": 32,
    "height": 32
  }
}
```

> ##### _Converted Ballerina Record_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Converted Ballerina record**
```

```ballerina
type ImagesItem record {
    string url;
    int width;
    int height;
    boolean isTransparent?;
};

type Thumbnail record {
    string url;
    int width;
    int height;
};

type NewRecord record {
    string id;
    string 'type;
    string name;
    ImagesItem[] images;
    Thumbnail thumbnail;
};
```

> ##### _Converter Demo_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### _Converter Demo_
```
Check the heading level. Better to provide an explanation on what this is.

![alt text](./docs/images/converterDemo.gif?raw=true "Converter Demo")

> ## Use Case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use case
```

> JSON to Record converted API is primarily used by the [Ballerina vscode plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.ballerina) to convert JSON value to Ballerina record interactively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JSON to Record converter API is primarily used by the [Ballerina vscode plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.ballerina) to convert JSON value to Ballerina record interactively.
```

> JSON to Record converter API is primarily used by the [Ballerina vscode plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.ballerina) to convert JSON value to Ballerina record interactively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON to Record converter API is primarily used by the [Ballerina VS Code plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=WSO2.ballerina) to convert JSON values to Ballerina records interactively.
```

> ## JSON Value to Ballerina Record Mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## JSON value to Ballerina record mapping
```

### Introduction

> This specification is for the JSON value to Ballerina Record mapping without interacting intermediate type conversion. Providing this util will increase the accuracy of the record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification is for the JSON value to Ballerina record mapping without interacting intermediate type conversion. Providing this util will increase the accuracy of the record.
```

### Overview

> The tool is intended to map JSON values directly to Ballerina records without converting the JSON value to its schema. The tool individually analyzes the JSON value nodes and maps it to the Ballerina record either in-line or other. The JSON value is parsed as a parse tree using Google’s gson package. And the tree is traversed to generate the Ballerina record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool is intended to map JSON values directly to Ballerina records without converting the JSON value to its schema. The tool analyzes the JSON value nodes individually and maps them to the Ballerina record either in-line or other. The JSON value is parsed as a parse tree using Google’s gson package. And the tree is traversed to generate the Ballerina record.
```
Same as above. Why is this same content as above repeated here?

> [GSON Documentation](https://www.javadoc.io/static/com.google.code.gson/gson/2.6.2/com/google/gson/JsonParser.html#parse-java.lang.String-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, go to [Gson documentation](https://www.javadoc.io/static/com.google.code.gson/gson/2.6.2/com/google/gson/JsonParser.html#parse-java.lang.String-)
```

### Type mapping

> Parsing a JSON value returns a **_JsonElement_** as the root node. And **_JsonElement_** can be either of **_JsonObject_**, **_JsonPrimitive_**, **_JsonArray_** or **_JsonNull_**. And a **_JsonObject_** can be either of **_String_**, **_Number_** or **_Boolean_**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parsing a JSON value returns a `_JsonElement_` as the root node and the `_JsonElement_` can be either a `_JsonObject_`, `_JsonPrimitive_`, `_JsonArray_`, or `_JsonNull_`. A `_JsonObject_` can be either a `_String_`, `_Number_`, or `_Boolean_`.
```
Keep all keywords within backticks. Do we need these underscores?

> The below table shows how the JSON Types are mapped to Java Classes and how that is mapped to Ballerina Types in generating Ballerina records from JSON values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below shows how the JSON types are mapped to Java classes and how they are mapped to Ballerina types when generating Ballerina records from JSON values.
```

<div>
    <table>
        <tbody>
            <tr>
                <td>Java Class</td>
                <td>JSON Type</td>
                <td>Ballerina Type&nbsp;</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>JsonElement</td>
                <td>&nbsp;</td>
                <td>&nbsp;</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>
                    <ul>
                        <li>JsonNull</li>
                    </ul>
                </td>
                <td>Null</td>

>                 <td>?/nil</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                <td>()/nil</td>
```

                <td>string</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>
                    <ul>
                        <ul>
                            <li>isNumber (contains &lsquo;.&rsquo;)</li>
                        </ul>
                    </ul>
                </td>
                <td>Number</td>
                <td>decimal</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>
                    <ul>
                        <ul>
                            <li>isNumber</li>
                        </ul>
                    </ul>
                </td>
                <td>Integer</td>
                <td>int</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>
                    <ul>
                        <li>JsonObject</li>
                    </ul>
                </td>
                <td>Object</td>
                <td>record</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>
                    <ul>
                        <li>JsonArray</li>
                    </ul>
                </td>
                <td>Array</td>
                <td>array</td>
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>
    <p>&nbsp;</p>
</div>

> ### Mapping of Null Type

Reviewer 2: Shall we modify the topic as `Mapping of null and optional values`?

> ### Mapping of Null and Optional Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mapping of null and optional types
```

> This section explains how different ways an optional Ballerina field can be generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains the different ways by which an optional Ballerina field can be generated.
```

> #### Scenario 01: JSON null

Reviewer 2: Do we need to add these scenario numbers? IMO only using H4 headers for the sub-levels topic might be enough. WDYT?

Author: Yeah, we can remove scenarios. But in certain places, scenarios are referred. So having numbers would be easy to identifiable isn't it? If we have some other alternatives, we can remove this.

Reviewer: Let's add a general topic named `Scenarios` and have the scenarios as sub-topics under it so they can be referred to via the URL or hyperlink when required.

> When the value of a JSON field is null, it can be mapped as an optional field of [anydata](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#anydata) data type in ballerina.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the value of a JSON field is null, it can be mapped as a field of [anydata](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#anydata) data type in ballerina.
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**JSON value**
```
Let's be consistent with the format used above.

```json
{
   "nullProperty": null
}
```
Ballerina
```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   anydata nullProperty;
};
```

> #### Scenario 02: Differencing Fields in the same JSON Object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Scenario 02: Optional fields within the same JSON object
```

> When there are two or more JSON Objects with the same name, and if there are any differencing fields those fields will also be considered as optional fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When there are two or more JSON objects with the same name, and if there are any different fields, those fields will also be considered optional fields.
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "object": {
    "fieldOne": "StringValue",
    "fieldTwo": 16
  },
  "object": {
    "fieldOne": "StringValue"
  }
}
```
Ballerina
```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   string fieldOne;
   int fieldTwo?;
};
```

> In the above example, both JSON object fields are with the same name. And there is an intersecting field which is **_fieldOne_** and the differencing field **_fieldTwo_**. Thus, the intersecting field is made to be required and the differencing field is made to be optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, both JSON object fields have the same name. Also, there is an intersecting field, which is `_fieldOne_` and the different field is `_fieldTwo_`. Therefore, the intersecting field is made to be required and the differentt field is made to be optional.
```

> ### Mapping of Primitive Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Mapping of primitive types
```

> This section explains how JSON primitives can be mapped to Ballerina records. The JSON primitive types are String, Boolean and Number. Any JSON primitive type will be parsed as a **_JsonPrimitive_** Java object. And each object can be checked for String, Boolean or Number by calling the relevant method on the object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains how JSON primitives can be mapped to Ballerina records. The JSON primitive types are String, Boolean, and Number. Any JSON primitive type will be parsed as a `_JsonPrimitive_` Java object. Each object can be checked for String, Boolean, or Number by calling the relevant method on the object.
```
We use Oxford commas as a practice in Ballerina documentation. Also, starting sentences with the word `and` is not considered a good writing practice.

#### Scenario  03: JSON string

> JSON string can be mapped to ballerina string type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON string can be mapped to Ballerina string type.
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "stringProperty": "StringValue"
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   string stringProperty;
};
```

#### Scenario  04: JSON boolean

> JSON boolean can be mapped to ballerina boolean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON boolean can be mapped to a Ballerina boolean.
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "booleanProperty": true
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   boolean booleanProperty;
};
```

#### Scenario  05: JSON number

> JSON Numbers can be either of below,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON numbers can be either of the below.
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```
Need a title above the code snippet to be consistent with the other sections above.

{
  "positiveInteger": 210,
  "negativeInteger": -210,
  "floatingPointNumber": 21.05,
  "exponentialNumber": 2.105E+1
}
```

> So, we have to map JSON numbers to either of Ballerina int, decimal or float based on the value. And, here we use all floating point numbers as decimals since, decimal is more appropriate to use since, decimals are more precise than floats and can store 128 bits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON numbers should have to be mapped to either of the Ballerina int, decimal, or float types based on the value. Here, all floating point numbers are used as decimals since decimal is more appropriate to use and also because decimals are more precise than floats and can store 128 bits.
```
We do not use the word `we` in technical documentation. It should always be addressing the user directly saying `you`. If not, using passive voice is the best practice.

                <td><span style="color: #185e73;">int</span></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td><span style="color: #777777;">"</span><span style="color: #448c27;">negativeInteger</span><span style="color: #777777;">":</span><span style="color: #9c5d27;">-210</span></td>
                <td><span style="color: #185e73;">int</span></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td><span style="color: #777777;">"</span><span style="color: #448c27;">floatingPointNumber</span><span style="color: #777777;">":</span><span style="color: #9c5d27;">21.05</span></td>
                <td><span style="color: #185e73;">decimal</span></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td><span style="color: #777777;">"</span><span style="color: #448c27;">exponentialNumber</span><span style="color: #777777;">":</span><span style="color: #9c5d27;">2.105E+1</span></td>
                <td><span style="color: #185e73;">decimal</span></td>
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>
</div>

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "positiveInteger": 210,
  "negativeInteger": -210,
  "floatingPointNumber": 21.05,
  "exponentialNumber": 2.105E+1
}
```
Ballerina
```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   int positiveInteger;
   int negativeInteger;
   decimal floatingPointNumber;
   decimal exponentialNumber;
};
```
Since both integers and decimals are classified as **_JsonPrimitive_** type, in the implementation level, Integers and decimals are classified based on the _point (.)_ character.

### Mapping of Object Types
This section explains how JSON objects can be mapped to Ballerina records. Each JSON object in the JSON value will be a new record or an inline record. Any JSON object will be parsed as a **_JsonObject_** Java object and will return a map with the field name as key and the object as value. And each JSON Object can have its child nodes as either of **_JsonObject, JsonPrimitive, JsonArray or JsonNull._**

#### Scenario 06: JSON Object
JSON
```json
{
  "recordProperty": {"name": "tom", "age": 5}
}
```
Ballerina
```ballerina
type RecordProperty record {
   string name;
   int age;
};
 
type NewRecord record {
   RecordProperty recordProperty;
};
```

> There can be many JSON child objects with the same field name, those JSON objects will be mapped into a single Ballerina record where its intersecting fields are required Ballerina fields and the differencing fields are optional Ballerina fields. (This is explained in scenario 2)

Author: No it's actually in sets, we have intersect and difference right. So intersecting fields and differencing fields are taken from that context. But yeah we can use `different` fields instead

#### Scenario 07: JSON object with different field values

> This is the scenario when there are two JSON child objects with the same field names, and the child objects have fields with the same name but different types of values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This scenario has two JSON child objects with the same field names and the child objects have fields with the same name but different types of values.
```

JSON
```json
{
  "recordProperty": {"name": "tom", "age": 5},
  "recordProperty": {"name": "tom", "age": "tom"}
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type RecordProperty record {
   string name;
   (int|string) age;
};
 
type NewRecord record {
   RecordProperty recordProperty;
};
```

### Mapping of Array Types

#### Scenario 08: JSON array without items
Json Arrays are mapped into Ballerina arrays

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": []
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   anydata[] arrayProperty;
};
```

> If the JSON array is empty, it means the array can contain any value which can be serializable. Thus, the Ballerina record field would have the data type of anydata which is the union of any serializable data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the JSON array is empty, it means that the array can contain any value, which can be serializable. Thus, the Ballerina record field would have the data type of anydata, which is the union of any serializable data types.
```

#### Scenario 09: JSON array of same type values

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [10,20,40]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   int[] arrayProperty;
};
```

> This scenario can be applied for any type. No matter the type, if all values in the array are of the same type, then the record would get created with the field’s type as an array of the same type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This scenario can be applied to any type. For any type, if all values in the array are of the same type, then, the record will get created with the field’s type as an array of the same type.
```

> #### Scenario 10: JSON array with mixed value types (oneOf)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Scenario 10: JSON array with mixed value types (`oneOf`)
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [10, 20, 40, "AU", "UK"]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecord record {
   (int|string)[] arrayProperty;
};
```
This is when there are more than one type of values present in the JSON array. The Ballerina record’s field type would be the union of the types of the values in the JSON array.

#### Scenario 11: JSON array with same JSON objects

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [{"name": "tom", "age": 5}, {"name": "jerry", "age": 4}]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type ArrayPropertyItem record {
   string name;
   int age;
};
 
type NewRecord record {
   ArrayPropertyItem[] arrayProperty;
};
```

> This scenario is when the JSON array only holds JSON objects and if all the objects schema is the same. If the Objects in the JSON array are different or if the array contains other types, then those are handled separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, the JSON array only holds JSON objects, and if the schema of all the objects is the same. If the objects in the JSON array are different or if the array contains other types, then, those are handled separately.
```

#### Scenario 12: JSON array with different JSON objects

> In this case even if the objects in the array are completely different(the fields), still those objects will be treated the same with differencing fields having optional types (In such scenario all fields will become optional) See _Scenario 13_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, even if the objects in the array (the fields) are completely different, still those objects will be treated the same with different fields having optional types (in such scenarios, all fields will become optional) . For example, see [scenario 13]().
```
Add the link to scenario 13.

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [{"name": "tom", "age": 5}, {"name": "jerry", "age": 4, "country": "SL"}]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type ArrayPropertyItem record {
   string name;
   int age;
   string country?;
};
 
type NewRecord record {
   ArrayPropertyItem arrayProperty;
};
```

> #### Scenario 13: JSON array completely different JSON objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Scenario 13: JSON array with completely different JSON objects
```

> This is where all the fields are different in the objects in an array. (Even though the fields are different all these objects will be treated as same when converting to Ballerina record)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This scenario has all different fields in the objects in an array (even though the fields are different, all these objects will be treated as the same when converting to Ballerina records).
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [{"name": "tom", "age": 5}, {"city": "Kandy", "zip": 71500}]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type ArrayProperty record {
   string name?;
   int age?;
   string city?;
   int zip?;
};
 
type NewRecord record {
   ArrayProperty[] arrayProperty;
};
```

#### Scenario 14: JSON array with different types

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [{"name": "tom", "age": 5}, "String Value", 5, 5.67]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type ArrayPropertyItem record {
   string name;
   int age?;
};
 
type NewRecordList record {
   (ArrayPropertyItem|decimal|int|string)[] arrayProperty;
};
```

> In this case, if there are more than two types of values in an array. This will be handles as union of data types in Ballerina record creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This scenario has more than two types of values in an array. This will be handled as the union of data types in the Ballerina record creation.
```

#### Scenario 15: JSON array of arrays

> This is where Nested JSON arrays are being handled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where nested JSON arrays are being handled.
```

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [[10, 20, 40], [10, 20, 18]]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type NewRecordList record {
   int[][] arrayProperty;
};
```

> Here, the nested array can be any type, if the types are different, it would be handled differently. See _Scenario 17_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the nested array can be any type. If the types are different, it would be handled differently. For example, see[Scenario 17]().
```
Add the link to the scenario 17.

#### Scenario 16: JSON array with different types and arrays

> JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON
```
Same as above.

```json
{
  "arrayProperty": [{"name": "tom", "age": 5}, "String Value", 5, 5.67, [10, 20, 40], [["10", 20, 18]]]
}
```

> Ballerina

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina
```
Same as above.

```ballerina
type ArrayPropertyItem record {
   string name;
   int age?;
};
 
type NewRecordList record {
   (ArrayPropertyItem|decimal|int|string|int[]|(int|string)[][])[] arrayProperty;
};
```

> The implementation can handle such complex scenarios as well. Here there are many values with different data types are handled. There is a nested array of different types within the array. Nested array of the same type. JSON object and JSON primitives. And all these types are handled when creating a Ballerina record by having the union of all these types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation can handle complex scenarios having many values with different data types as well. The above scenario has a nested array of different types within the array. The nested array is of the same type as the JSON object and JSON primitives. All these types are handled when creating a Ballerina record by having the union of all these types.
```
Please check the incomplete phrases and the suggestions to verify if the technical meaning has got changed.
